.TH xqodem 1 "July 1, 2015"
.SH NAME
xqodem \- Qodem Terminal Emulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xqodem
.I qodem-options
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xqodem
is a script wrapper around
.B qodem.
It tries to find a UTF\-8 and color capable X11-based terminal on your
system, and then runs qodem in a terminal session.
.SH OPTIONS
See
.I qodem
(1).
.SH COPYRIGHT NOTICE
Copyright \(co 2015 Kevin Lamonte
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.
\" .PP
\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
\" this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
\" are preserved on all copies.
\" .PP
\" Permission is granted to process this file through troff and print the
\" results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
\" notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
\" (this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
\" .PP
\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
\" resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
\" notice identical to this one.
\" .PP
\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
\" into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
\" except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
\" by the Foundation.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
qodem(1)
